# OvCa-Pop-Dynamics
Population dynamics modeling of sensitive and resistant ovarian cancer populations

This repository contains the files and data needed to parameterize, perform sensitivity and identifiability analysis using data from two ovarian cancer cell lines, A2780 and Tyk-nu. The data and code is divided in two folders one for the A2780 and one for the Tyk-nu analysis. The analysis for both cell lines is really similar for the parameterization and change once the most parsimonious model is identified

## Step 1: Parameterization 
Go to each of the cell line's folders and download the entire clean_parameterization model which contains all the scripts, functions and data necessary to run the code successfully. The scripts need to be run in the following order:
- untreated_parameter_estimation.m for A2780 and A2780cis in the A2780 folder and clean_parameter_estimation_new.m for Tyk-nu and Tyk-nu cp.r in the Tyk folder: MATLAB script to estimate parameters and calculate BIC values for equations 1 and 2 for both sensitive and resistant populations (using no treatment mono-culture data). Code for calculating 95% CI and R squared values for most parsimonious models is also included in these scripts 
- treated_parameter_estimation_A2780_10days.m, treated_parameter_estimation_A2780cis_10days.m, treated_parameter_estimation_Tyk_10days.m, treated_parameter_estimation_Tykcpr_10days.m: MATLAB script to estimate parameters and calculate BIC values for equations 3 through 20 for both sensitive and resistant populations (using cisplatin-treated under 3 different concentrations mono-culture data). Code for calculating 95% CI and R squared values for most parsimonious models is also included in these scripts
- co_culture_ALLtreatments_ALLsensitivities_A2780_10days.m and co_culture_ALLtreatments_ALLsensitivities_Tyk_10days.m: MATLAB script to estimate for the shared carrying capacity of the co-culture model and calculate BIC values (using no treatment and cisplatin-treated data).  Code for calculating 95% CI and R squared values for most parsimonious models is also included in these scripts
- co_culture_ALLdata_ALLtreatments_ALLsensitivities_A2780_10days.m and co_culture_ALLdata_ALLtreatments_ALLsensitivities_Tyk_10days.m: MATLAB script to estimate for the most influential parameters which was ran after Step 2: identifiability and Step 3: sensitivity analysis. Once the most influential parameters were determined, they were estimated using these scripts and the BIC was calculated (using ALL the datasets including no treatment cisplatin-treated mono- and co-culture data). Code for calculating 95% CI and R squared values for most parsimonious models is also included in these scripts

## Step 2: Identifiability analysis
Go to each of the cell line's folders and download the entire identifiability folder which contains all the scripts and functions necessary to run the code successfully. The scripts need to be run in the following order:
- A2780cocultureModel_all_noT.m and TykcocultureModel_all_noT.m: MATLAB functions that contained most parsimonious model identified through parameterization. These functions evaluate through the GenSSI algorithm all the parameters in the most parsimonious model. To run them type in the command window: genssiStartup; and then the genssiMain('A2780cocultureModel_all_noT',6) or genssiMain('TykcocultureModel_all_noT',6), instead of 6 type the number of derivatives to be evaluated
- A2780cocultureModel_top4_noT.m and TykcocultureModel_top4_noT.m: MATLAB functions with the most parsimonious models identified through parameterization. These functions evaluate through the GenSSI algorithm the top 4 most sensitive parameters in the most parsimonious model identified on Step 3: senisitivity analysis. To run them type in the command window: genssiMain('A2780cocultureModel_top4_noT',2) and genssiMain('TykcocultureModel_top4_noT',2). Only 2 derivatives were necessary to result in a structurally globally identifiable model

## Step 3: sensitivity analysis 
Go to each of the cell line's folders and download the entire sensitivity_analysis_m13 folder. Initially the following scripts were edited to include the model and estimated parameters to then perform  sensitivity analysis: setParameters.m, odefun.m (ce was changed whether no treatment or cisplatin-treated conditions were evaluated, 1.00 for A2780 model and 0.66 for Tyk-nu), setInitialConditions.m  
-sobolMain.m: MATLAB script to be run to perform sensitivity analysis. The script will be run twice one for no treatment and one for cisplatin-treated conditions. After running the sobolMain.m script, it should generate some output variables in the Workspace. Keeping these variables in the workspace, then run the interactionplots.m script located in the interaction_plots_m13 

## Step 4: AT simulations
Go to each of the cell line's folders and download the entire AT_simulations folder. The four run_ functions contain the finalized models and the loops for running the different treatment schedules with output files. The different treatment schedules can be run the following manner (order not required):
- run_coculture_constant_simulation_new.m: MATLAB function for constant treatment. Type this function run_coculture_constant_simulation_new(Ce, S0, R0) in the command window, change Ce for the cisplatin concentration to be evaluated, and change S0 and R0 for the initial sensitive and resistant total cells to be evaluated
- run_coculture_adaptive_simulation_new.m: MATLAB function for AT1 schedule. Type this function in the command prompt run_coculture_adaptive_simulation_new(S0, R0, u0, threshFrac) in the command window, change S0 and R0 for the initial sensitive and resistant total cells to be evaluated, change u0 for the initial treatment for the first 24 hour period, change threshFrac for the proportion of total population indicating treatmnent adjustment (should be a number between 0 and 1)
- run_coculture_adaptive_simulation2_new.m: MATLAB function for AT2 schedule. Type this function in the command prompt run_coculture_adaptive_simulation_new(S0, R0, u0, threshFrac) in the command window, change S0 and R0 for the initial sensitive and resistant total cells to be evaluated, change u0 for the initial treatment for the first 24 hour period, change threshFrac for the proportion of total population indicating treatmnent adjustment (should be a number between 0 and 1)
- run_coculture_adaptive_simulation3_new.m: MATLAB function for AT3 schedule. Type this function in the command prompt run_coculture_adaptive_simulation_new(S0, R0, u0, threshFrac) in the command window, change S0 and R0 for the initial sensitive and resistant total cells to be evaluated, change u0 for the initial treatment for the first 24 hour period, change threshFrac for the proportion of total population indicating treatmnent adjustment (should be a number between 0 and 1)
- run_coculture_alternating_simulation_new.m: MATLAB function for alternating bang-bang skipping schedule. Type this function in the command prompt run_coculture_adaptive_simulation_new(S0, R0, u0, threshFrac) in the command window, change S0 and R0 for the initial sensitive and resistant total cells to be evaluated, change u0 for the initial treatment for the first 24 hour period
